This Zoho logo… How many times we must have
seen it?! Do you remember if it is this…
or this… or this…?
Talking about philosophers… If we say the
word "philosophy", we are only reminded of
these three people, more often than not. I
am sure you remember their names. There was
Aristotle. There was Socrates. And, there
was Plato. Who came first? Do you know?!
Namaste!
A guide for life! Always, somebody there to
guide us, help us, to show the way! We saw
those three people, didn't we?! All three
of them were Athenians! Imagine, they lived
during the same time, they knew each other
very well, they were students of the previous
person. If there was Socrates in the beginning,
he had created an amazing academic institution
for philosophy, and Plato was a student in
that. And, Aristotle arrived as Plato's student!
In the whole wide world, one little city called
Athens, two thousand five hundred years ago,
three people, almost at the same time! How
special! That relationship between the teacher
and the student! What a lofty pair!
"Have you seen God" - "Have you seen God" - "Can
you show me God" - this was the question
he went around asking everybody he met - Narendra,
soon to become famous as Swami Vivekananda.
He wanted to know if there was somebody who
had seen God, who had experienced God, he
wanted to learn from that person. He travelled
far and wide. Finally, somebody pointed him
towards Sri Ramakrishna. He went and he asked
the same question. "Have you seen God" - Yes,
came the instant answer from Sri Ramakrishna!
It was a shock! He said, "I am, and that is
enough proof that there is God". I am existing.
And, the reason for my existence itself, is
the existence of a concept called God!" That
was the beginning of a beautiful relationship.
If you step over to Hindu mythology, there
is this beautiful relationship between the
Sun God… Technically, the person who knows
everything, because in the geocentric world,
he is a person who circumnavigates the globe
once every day! There is nothing that he doesn't
know, really! He knows, he observes, he analyses,
he tracks everything). It would so happen
that the Sun God would give a boon to the
lucky little monkey - our Hanuman - "I
will be your mentor. I will be your teacher!"
And, dutifully, Hanuman would jump up into
the sky one fine day, and ask the Sun God
"You had promised me to teach me. I am here!",
and the Sun God would say, "Yes, but I have
this work. I have to go around Earth once
every twenty-four hours, what are you going
to do!" To which, Hanuman would reply, "No
problem! I see that you have a seven-horsed
chariot! I will fly backwards! A few feet
in front of the chariot! You mind your business!
I will learn by observing you! I will learn
in those few moments of rest that you get!
You can teach me! Continue with your work!
I will learn by working with you! I will bend.
I will change my attitude. I will change the
way I do things. I will fly backwards!"
Do you remember the story of Troy?! A very
beautiful princess is abducted. And, to get
the princess back where she is supposed to
be, a huge armada of thousands of ships gets
going, and Ulysses is one of the heroes of
that big big war… a huge horse made of wood…
People inside the horse… They open the gates
for the invaders… And the unbeatable fortress
of Troy is destroyed! But, in this story,
there is a warrior who never took part in
the whole of this war! The name of that warrior?
Telemachus! Meaning, "Far from the battle",
literally! How sneakily has Homer woven the
story!! A person far from the battle, a person
who never took part in the war, but stayed
elsewhere! The Son of Ulysses! When starting
on his journey, not having any idea how long
this was going to take, (He really didn't
know! He fought for ten years, and then struggled
to return, struggled a lot, for ten more years!
Twenty years! All through the childhood of
Telemachus, he was not with his son. The father
was not with his son. Fearing that something
like this should happen, the Dad appoints
one of his friends, one of his respected friends:
"Please take care of this boy. Teach him how
to do politics, how to work with people, how
to fight, how to not fight, teach him everything!".
And, his name? Mentor! The original mentor,
M in Capital! He was a human being. Was a
guide. Was a guru. The person who taught everything
to Telemachus. To honour that amazing contribution
he made, the English dictionary borrowed his
name and added it as a word! Mentor! To guide,
to show the way, to be the guiding lamp, or
the lighthouse, that helps you avoid trouble!
If you were to pick a pair from more recent
times, you may want to consider Maya Angelou
and Oprah Winfrey. Oprah Winfrey, we all know,
probably the single richest billionaire black
woman in the world! She has struggled a lot.
She has suffered a lot. A troubled childhood.
And, along the way, she meets Maya Angelou.
A poetess. A civil rights activist. Learns
a lot from her. Primarily, she says, "Maya
is the person who taught me how to work with
people. What is trust? What is belief? What
is faith? How to accept people for who they
are, without second-guessing them - it
was Maya who taught me that lesson." Again,
a beautiful mentoring relationship.
Why do we need mentors? In my opinion, if
you want to do something special, if you want
to be, not just good, but want to be great,
you will have to take the road less traveled.
If you are going to go on the same path that
everybody else has traveled, yes, you can
probably join a Kota class like this, and
learn like everybody else is learning. But,
if you are going to go off the beaten path…,
…you need somebody who will be specially,
in a dedicated manner, working just with you,
one on one. They would have already committed
the errors you were going to make! The questions
that would soon be occurring to you, they
might have already answered for themselves.
And, hey… you may wonder, why do I need
a "person", to get my questions answered…
Correct.. Don't we have the internet? Don't
we have Youtube? Isn't that enough? Well,
yes! But, turn that around for a moment. Who
is going to ASK you questions? Will Google
ASK you questions? Google only knows how to
answer all the amazing questions you ask.
On the other hand, the mentor torments you!
All the times when you are awake, also the
times when you are are sleeping even, they're
going to haunt your dreams, they're going
to give you sleepless nights. They're going
to challenge you. They're going to ask you.
They're going to test you. They're going to
push you to the limits of your endurance.
Because…? They are invested in seeing you
grow. They have made a commitment, they have
shown interest, and want and wish that you
actually grow. That's when they take up a
mentoring relationship with you. If they are
going to accept you as a mentee, they must
be invested in the idea, that yes, here is
a seed that can grow. There is potential.
In this book, Sheryl Sandberg, the COO of
Facebook, has done a lot of good to the women
community. But, if you don't look at this
book as one written for women, but as one
written for people wanting to grow, people
in the process of growing, then, there are
a lot of good takeaways for everyone of us
in this book. Specifically, she has a chapter
on mentoring.
And in that, she says, I am bored, I am really
upset, when somebody meets me, says hi, introduces
themselves, and immediately they start asking
me, "Will you be my mentor". It is a really
bad question! Wrong! It is, she says, equivalent
to some stranger coming, shaking your hands,
and popping this question to you, "Will you
marry me!" No way, that's not how a relationship
is created, it has to be harvested only after
it is cultivated for a long time. So, how
do you cultivate such a relationship? She
gives four or five pointers.
Primarily, she says, please stop believing
in this Sleeping Beauty story. Remember that
story? A lady sleeping inside a glass casket,
holding on to a red rose, many years pass
by, Prince Charming came on horseback, kissed
her, took her away! That is NOT going to happen.
A mentor is NOT going to come if you just
don't do anything, if you just keep waiting.
You have to do a few things. What are they?
Number 1! First, know what you want. Why are
you looking for a mentor? What is the gap
you want to fill? What is the bridge you want
to build? What is that chasm you want to cross?
First, find out what is the problem you are
fighting. That self-introspection is needed.
Then, you need to be able to manage your time
well. Remember that Hanuman story? Flying
backwards! What an example! I will bend over
backwards. I will do anything you want. Just
take me as your mentor.. I will help you.
I will work with you. I will do your work.
In those days, during Gurukulam, ninety percent
of the time, the student would be washing
the teacher's feet, taking care of the cows
and the cattle belonging to the Guru, probably
doing vegetable gardening for the Guru Mata
or the Guru Patni, that is how it started.
So, be able to take care of your time well,
manage it very well, you must be an asset
to the person you are taking as a mentor.
The third thing is, Give before you even think
of Taking. Many many years, people stay in
the apprenticeship mode. I am a student. I
observe, I watch, I learn, along the way,
there is something that is beneficial that
gets in. That can happen later. But right
now, I need to cultivate the mentor-mentee
relationship. And, I am here to provide support.
I am here to be the Executive Assistant, to
this great man, to this great woman. That
is the way you have to see it. Give long before
you even think of Taking.
And, finally, many of us make this mistake.
We end up not being coachable at all. What
is this "Coachability"? Will you accept if
given feedback? It is not about taking feedback
in the right spirit. That is the first level.
But, the second level is, do you know how
to incorporate feedback? When meaningful feedback
and criticism come to you, do you know how
to work in your system? Fix those little things?
So that the feedback that comes the next time
is different? Coachability! You can't have
an ego, if you want to be coachable! You need
to have very good self-understanding! That
is when you are coachable! And, that is when
this mentor-mentee relationship will blossom.
Finally, she says that we should stop saying,
"If only I had a mentor, I would have excelled".
We should stop that! Why? That is because,
if only you excelled in whatever you were
doing, the mentor would appear automatically!
When the student is ready, the teacher appears!
Remember, we have seen it earlier too? What
is the meaning of that? The mentor is waiting.
For that amazing next-generation entity. So
that he or she can pour the remainder of their
lives and leave a legacy.
That is the legacy we are seeing here too.
Mentors need proteges too! Remember Lydian
Nadhaswaram. Winner of the one million dollar
prize. Teenage boy wonder. Child prodigy.
Recently, he became the first and probably
the one and only student of the great Ilaiyaraaja!
Something in the boy must have turned something
on in that amazing brain of Mr. Ilaiyaraaja - the
Maestro. And so, he volunteered, "Hey, I want
to take you as a student!" Isn't that amazing?!
As a closing thought, I just wanted to close
the loop of what we started in the beginning.
Which of these is the correct logo of Zoho?
There is a simple trick, folks! Remember this
game? Rugby? R U G B Y, yes? Red, Green, Blue,
Yellow! That is the correct order! Everything
else is wrong! Similarly, I had asked who
had come first! Plato? Aristotle? Socrates?
Very simple trick again! Remember the spa?
A place where they let you lie down, pour
water on you, massage you with oil, imagine
these three people provided you a spa! A spa
for the brain! They gave it that massage!
SPA! Socrates! Plato! Aristotle! That is the
order in which they appear!
Thank you then! We will meet again on the
18th!